# Step 6: Default LISFLOOD output

LISFLOOD can generate a wide variety of output. The output can be either as maps (netCDF format, which can be visualised with any netCDF viewer e.g. [Panoply](https://www.giss.nasa.gov/tools/panoply/download/)) or time series (tss format). Reporting of output files can be switched on and off using the `<lfoptions>` section in the LISFLOOD settings file. Even though not recommended, the names of the output files can be changed in the `<lfbinding>` section of the settings file. 

For instance, simulated discharge can be generated by any of the following options:
* Maps:
```xml
<setoption choice="1" name="repDischargeMaps"/>
```

* Time series:
```xml
<setoption choice="1" name="repDischargeTs"/>
```

A number of output files are specific to optional modules, such as the simulation of reservoirs, lakes, etc.

## Maps

### State maps

Output state maps are reported when switching on the option `repStateMaps` in the settings file. These state maps can be used to define the initial conditions of a succeeding simulation. A full list of state maps can be found [here](../4_annex_state-variables) 
```xml
<setoption choice="1" name="repStateMaps"/>
```

> To speed up the pre-run, with `InitLisflood = 1` the output is limited to the maps _lzavin_, _avgdis_, and (optionally) the end maps of the states listed [here](../3_step5_model-initialisation).

### Other output maps

This paragraph provides examples of output maps that are not included in the `repStateMaps`, but can be of interest to many users: 

1. **Discharge**:
```xml
<setoption choice="1" name="repDischargeMaps"/>
```

2. **Surface runoff**: that is runoff from both impervious and permeable surfaces.
```xml
<setoption choice="1" name="repSurfaceRunoffMaps"/>
```

3. **Total runoff**: that is the sum of surface runoff and runoff from upper and lower groundwater zones.
```xml
<setoption choice="1" name="repTotalRunoffMaps"/>
```

4. **Seepage**: that is flow from the third soil layer to the upper groundwater zone.
```xml
<setoption choice="1" name="repSeepSubToGWMaps"/>
```

5. **Water volume abstracted from surface water bodies to satisfy anthropogenic use**:
```xml
<setoption choice="1" name="repTotalAbs"/>
```

## Time series

Time series file have *.tss* extension and they can be opened with any text editor. These files are organized in a number of columns. Specifically, the first column shows the timestep and the other columns show the values of the selected output variable for each gauge or site. Gauges and sites locations must be defined by the users in the settings file. 

1. Time series with values of **model state variables at user-defined locations** (sites). Note that 'sites' can be either individual pixels or larger areas (e.g. catchments, administrative areas, and so on). In case of larger areas the model reports the average value for each respective area.
```xml
<setoption choice="1" name="repStateSites"/>
```

2. Time series with values of **model rate variables at user-defined locations** (sites).
```xml
<setoption choice="1" name="repRateSites"/>
```

3. Time series with values of **meteorological input variables, averaged over the area upstream of each gauge location**.
```xml
<setoption choice="1" name="repMeteoUpsGauges"/>
```

4. Time series with values of **model state variables (examples are soil moisture and lower groundwater storage), averaged over area upstream of each gauge location**.
```xml
<setoption choice="1" name="repStateUpsGauges"/>
```

5. Time series with values of **model rate variables (examples are the outflow from the upper and lower groundwater zones to the channels; the vertical seepage and percolation flows), averaged over area upstream of each gauge location**.
```xml
<setoption choice="1" name="repRateUpsGauges"/>
```

6. Time series that are specific to other **options** (e.g. simulation of reservoirs).
```xml
<setoption choice="1" name="repsimulateReservoirs"/>
```


> Note that the options `repStateUpsGauges`, `repRateUpsGauges` and `repDischargeMaps` tend to slow down the execution of the model quite dramatically. For applications of the model where performance is critical (e.g. automated calibration runs), we advise to keep them switched off, if possible. 

It is important to be aware of the spatial domain for which each time series is computed. For instance, all *rate variables* are reported as pixel-average values. Soil moisture and groundwater storage are reported for the permeable fraction of each pixel only. The reported snow cover is the average of the snow depths in snow zones A, B and C. 

This [**Annex**](../4_annex_output-files/) summarises most of the options to report additional output maps. 